In this lecture, we're
going to explore
the pandas series structure.
By the end of this lecture,
you should be familiar with
how to store and manipulate
single-dimensional index
data in the series object.
The series is one of the core
data structures in pandas.
You can think of it as a cross
between a list and a dictionary.
The items are all
stored in an order and
there's labels with which
you can retrieve them.
An easy way to visualize
this is two columns of data.
The first is the special index,
a lot like keys in a dictionary.
While the second is
your actual data.
It's important to note that the
data column has the label of its
own and can be retrieved
using the dot name attribute.
This is different than
with dictionaries and is
useful when it comes to merging
multiple columns of data.
We'll talk about that
later on in the course.
Let's import pandas to
get things started.
So import pandas as pd.
As you might expect
you can create
a series by passing
in a list of values.
When you do this, pandas
automatically assigns an index
starting with zero and sets
the name of the series to none.
Let's work on an example of this.
One of the easiest ways to
create a series is to use
an array-like object like a list.
So here I'll make a
list of three of the students,
Alice, Jack, and
Molly all as strings.
So students equals list
Alice, Jack, and Molly.
Now we just call the
series function in
pandas and pass in
the students so pd.Series.
So Series is a top level or
a module function and
we pass in students.
The results is a Series object
which is nicely
rendered to the screen.
We see here that the pandas has
automatically identified
the type of data in
the series as object
and that it set the dtype
parameter as appropriate.
We see that the values
are indexed with
integers starting with zero.
Now we don't have to use strings.
If we passed in a list of
whole numbers for instance,
we can see that pandas
sets the type to int 64.
Underneath, pandas
storage series values
in a typed array using
the Numpy library.
This offer significant
speed-up when
processing data versus
traditional python lists.
Let's create a little
list of numbers.
So here numbers equals,
and I'll just throw in
three integers 1,
2, and 3, and now let's
turn that into a series.
So again pd.Series module level
function pass in numbers.
And we see that on my architecture,
the result is a dtype
of int 64 objects.
There's some other
typing details that
exists for performance that
are important to know.
The most important is
how Numpy and thus
pandas handle missing data.
In Python, we have
the none type to
indicate a lack of data.
But what do we do
if we want to have
a typed list like this
in the series object?
Underneath, pandas does
some type conversion for us.
If we create a list
of strings and we
have one element, a None type,
pandas inserts that as a None and
uses the type object for
the underlying array.
Okay. Let's recreate
our list of students,
but let's leave out the last one
and we'll just set it to None.
So students equals Alice, Jack,
and then we'll just have a None,
and now let's convert that into
a series to see what happens.
So pd.Series students.
So if we create a list
of numbers, integers,
or floats and put
in a None type,
pandas automatically
converts this
into a special
floating-point value
designated as NaN which
stands for Not a Number.
So let's see an example of this.
We will create a list
with a None value in it.
So a numbers equals 1, 2,
and None, and we'll turn
that into a series objects.
So pd.Series numbers.
You'll notice a couple of things.
First, NaN is a different value.
Second, pandas set
the dtype of this series to
a floating point numbers
instead of an object or ints.
That's maybe a bit of a surprise.
Why not just leave
this as an integer?
Underneath, pandas
represents NaN as
a floating point
number and because
integers can be
typecast to float,
pandas went and converted
our integers to
floats automatically.
So when you're wondering
why the list of
integers you put into a
series is not floats,
it's probably because there
is some missing data.
For those who might not have done
scientific computing
in Python before,
it's important to stress
that None and NaN
might be used by the Data
Scientist in the same way,
to denote missing data.
But that underneath,
these are not
represented by pandas
in the same way.
NaN is not equivalent to
None and when we try
the equality tests,
the result is false.
Let's bring in Numpy
which allows us
to generate an NaN value.
So we'll import Numpy as np,
and now let's compare it to None.
So just np.nan and does
this equal to None.
It turns out that you
actually can't even do
an equality test
of NaN to itself.
When you do the
answer's always false.
So if we just do
np.nan equals np.nan,
we also get false.
Instead you need to use
special functions to test for
the presence of not a number
such as the Numpy library isnan.
So we can use np.isnan this
function and pass it np.nan,
and we see that
the result is true.
So keep in mind that
when you see NaN,
it's meaning is similar
to None but it's
a numeric value and treated
differently for
efficiency reasons.
Let's talk more about how
pandas series can be created.
While my list might be
a common way to create
some play data,
often you have labeled data
that you want to manipulate.
A series can be created
directly from dictionary data.
If you do this, the index is
automatically
assigned to the keys
of the dictionary
that you provided and
not just incrementing integers.
Here's an example using
some data of students
and their classes.
So I'll create a new dictionaries
called student scores.
I'll have the keys, names,
so Alice is Physics,
then I'll make Jack,
Chemistry and Molly
you're in English,
and now I'm going to
create some new series.
So pd.Series and
passing this course,
I'll assign this to S and
then just print out
S. We see that since
it was string data,
pandas set the data type
of the series to object,
and we see that the index
the first column is
a list of strings.
Once this series
has been created,
we can get the index object
using the index attributes.
So if we just do
S.index for instance.
As you play more with pandas,
you'll notice that a lot of
things are implemented as
Numpy arrays and that they
have the dtype value set.
This is true of indices
and here pandas
inferred that we're using
objects for the index
and that's kinda cool.
Now this is interesting because
the dtype of object is
not just for strings,
but for arbitrary objects.
So let's create
a more complex type of data,
say a list of tuples.
So say, students as a list
and we'll just say
first name, last name.
So Alice Brown as
the first tuple,
Jack White as the second tuple,
and Molly Green as the third one.
And then we'll do
pd.Series with students.
So we see that each of
the tuples are stored in
the series object and
the type is of type object.
You can also separate
your index creation
from the data by
passing in an index as a list
explicitly to the series.
So here we'll create a new series
s=pd.Series will pass in Physics,
Chemistry, and English as
three subjects that
we're interested in,
and then we'll use
the index parameter
as a list of Alice, Jack,
and Molly and let's print
out s. So what happens if
your list of values in
the index object are not
aligned with the keys in
your dictionary for
creating the series?
Well, pandas overrides
the automatic creation to
favor only and all of
the index values
that you provided.
So we'll ignore from
your dictionary
all keys which are not
in your index and pandas
will add None or
NaN type values for
any index value you provide,
which is not in
your dictionary key list.
Here's an example, I'll pass
in a dictionary of
three items in this case
the students and their courses.
So I'll create students scores.
Again, Alice in physics,
Jack in Chemistry, and I think
we had Molly in English.
When I create the
series object though,
I'll only ask for an index with
three students and
I'll exclude Jack.
So let's do pd.Series,
pass in all of
the students score.
So this big dictionary,
and now you can imagine that
this is actually really
big and that it came from
some data file somewhere.
But that our index we're only
interested in
a couple of students.
So Alice, Molly, and we'll
make up some new one, Sam.
The result is that the
series object doesn't have
Jack in it even though he
was in our original dataset,
but explicitly does have
Sam in it but as a missing value.
In this lecture, we've explored
the pandas series data structure.
You've seen how to
create a series
from lists and dictionaries,
how indices work on data work,
and the way that pandas type
casts data including
missing values.